[Music]
if you head to Luzon island in the
Philippines you'll find Kaleo cave
hidden in the jungle what so special
about an old cave you may ask well this
is exactly where archaeologists
discovered a previously unknown ancient
species related to us humans no it's not
the kid down the street this one is
almost human just kidding the story
began in 2003 it started much earlier as
in fifty to sixty seven thousand years
ago but we won't go down memory lane
that far so 2003 it is the Philippines
haven't ever really been a hot spot for
archaeological research for reasons I'll
get into here in a bit however in recent
years has become the third island in
Southeast Asia to provide all kinds of
astonishing evidence of ancient human
activity and to tell you the truth and
of course that's what we do here
scientists didn't see it coming at all
you see the history of Asia although
incomplete had always seemed clear and
straightforward to experts
paleoanthropologists that's a $5 word
we're sure that different animal species
Homo erectus for instance arrived in
modern-day Indonesia over land bridges
that had still been intact about a
million years ago as for the area
located further to the east scientists
have always believed that due to
powerful ocean currents it had been
completely impassable without boats and
therefore uninhabitable Luzon Island was
one of those seemingly inaccessible
places because it also didn't have any
land bridge connecting it to the
mainland that's why researchers always
thought that any archaeological
excavations on the island would be
fruitless even so in 2003 dr. Armand
mejores a local archeologist from the
University of the Philippines started
excavations in Kaleo cave together with
his team
at that time researchers were still
unaware of the treasures the cave kept
within its limestone walls as they were
going about their research the team
found evidence of human activity in that
region including some tools and
pondering which were dated to be about
25,000 years old but this discovery
wasn't all that earth-shattering so the
scientists left the site mind you the
deepest they dug was about five feet
down but this is the norm for most
archaeologists working in Southeast Asia
they rarely dig deeper than six feet
after that they stopped excavations
because the search becomes useless the
Kaleo cave site would have stayed
forgotten and deserted for decades if it
wasn't for an exciting discovery the
following year in 2004 that's when
another group of archaeologists
discovered Homo floresiensis a tiny
human species that was later nicknamed
the Hobbit and it's no wonder these
early human-like beings were only as
tall as a modern three-year-old child
and lived on a remote Indonesian island
along with giant lizards and pygmy
elephants they disappeared from their
home island of Flores about 50,000 years
ago but scientists got enough evidence
to draw a clear picture of this species
even though it was a cool discovery on
its own it also inspired dr. Maharis to
return to kool al cave he got back on
track in 2007 with a firm decision to
dig deeper when the team had been
excavating the cave back in 2003 they
went through five feet of clay and found
nothing even relatively significant
before they decided to give up they came
across neither fossils nor any signs of
ancient human activity but their efforts
in 2007 paid off first of all the
archaeologists found a layer of rock
formed from a mixture of different
materials and you can imagine how
thrilled the scientists were when they
discovered that this layer was full of
bone fragments apparently these bones
were walked inside the cave a long time
ago but at the moment of discovery the
archaeologists couldn't even imagine how
long
it happened when the scientist first
started examining the bones they turned
out to be one big disappointment
it seemed that among the fossils there
were only bones belonging to animals
like pigs and deer but the team didn't
lose hope and sent their findings to
archaeologist dr. Phillip Piper asking
to look through the remains and voila I
imagine one minute dr. Piper was
examining the fossils and the next he
was calling dr. mejores with some great
news it would have been awesome to see
the look on me Harris's face when his
colleague Dean formed him that he had
found an almost complete foot bone that
resembled that of a human a bit too much
to be a coincidence
but it wasn't until 2010 that me Horace
and his team finally made their
revolutionary discovery in their search
the scientists stumbled across a 67
thousand-year-old human fossil at first
they believed the bone belonged to a
miniature representative of Homo sapiens
in this case it could have been the
oldest piece of evidence showing the
presence of our own species in the
Philippines that long ago but later it
turned out that the archaeologists
initial assumption was far from the
truth it was me Haris who first
suspected that they're finding might
belong to a structurally new species but
to prove his theory the team needed a
whole bunch of new fossils so they got
down to work and did some more digging
it probably comes as no surprise that
after going the extra mile
the researchers hit pay dirt can you dig
it during the following excavations in
2011 and 2015 they unveiled not only two
more toe bones but also two finger bones
seven teeth and part of a thigh bone the
scientists concluded that these remains
most likely belonged to three
individuals two adults and a child
however happy they were about the
discovery it was also extremely
confusing the fossils revealed a
bewildering mix of both advanced and
ancient characteristics for example the
teeth were tiny with a simple shape
making them similar to the teeth of
modern humans
but what makes them even more unique is
that one of the upper premolars found
had three roots a feature found in less
than 3% of people today at the same time
the discovered foot bone looked like one
of the ancient Australia pith Essenes
who were wandering around Africa about
three million years ago but let's try to
draw an image of this human-like species
which was dubbed homo Luzon Ensis in
honor of the island it was discovered on
the itsy-bitsy teeth meant that adults
were probably quite short about four
feet tall
besides the toe bone discovered by the
archeologists was slightly curved that's
why the scientists assumed that this
species led a mixed lifestyle but with
their ability to both climb trees and
walk on two legs they could have walked
in a peculiar way but researchers
haven't determined that yet
in any case scientists from all over the
world praised the thoroughness of the
research done by dr. Maharis and his
team everybody in the archaeological
community understood just how incredibly
hard it is to define a new species from
only 13 tiny bones and teeth there have
been attempts to extract DNA from the
discovered remains but so far they
haven't gotten any results unfortunately
this is typical for samples stewing for
tens of thousands of years in the
humidity and heat of rainforests but the
finding seems to raise more questions
than it answers for example did Homo
luzon Ensis learn to both climb trees
and walk when they got isolated on the
island or was it their inherent trait
and how and when did they end up on that
Island anyways remember it's never had
any land bridge connection to the
mainland the researchers do have two
theories about how the first humans got
to lose on one of them claims that they
set out on a voyage on purpose and
sailed on some kind of a raft according
to the other theory homo lose intensity
was brought to the island by a natural
disaster such as a tsunami
and while most scientists support the
natural disaster theory more and more
evidence is coming to light hinting that
the event might not have been that
accidental there is one more thing
though that makes scientists super
excited about the discovery
it seems humans that lived on Luzon
Island used tools to hunt and prepare
food the researchers came to this
conclusion after they found a deer bone
in the cave that had some marks on it as
if someone had used a stone tool to cut
it but that's not all in 2018
dr. mejores announced that chances are
homo Luzon ANSYS lived on the island
much further back in time the
archeologists found some stone tools as
well as a rhinoceros skeleton bearing
similar markings to that deer
not so far from Callao cave and brace
yourself these findings are a whopping
700,000 years old
unfortunately now it's almost impossible
to say for sure whether these tools were
used by homo luzon Ensis or some other
older unrelated species so we just must
wait for scientists to do further
research and let us all in on what our
ancient cousins were up to in their day
so have you heard about any other
exciting archeological findings let me
know down in the comments if you learn
something new today they can give this
video a like and share it with a friend
but hey we're not done excavating just
yet
we have over 2,000 cool videos for you
to check out all you have to do is pick
the left or right video click on it and
enjoy stay on the bright side of life